Wrap up project (#124)
statistikZH/statbotData: README.md

# statbotData

## The project
This repo is part of the [Statbot Swiss Project](https://www.bfs.admin.ch/bfs/de/home/dscc/blog/2023-02-statbot.html). The project has following parts: 
- **[Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db)**: A Postgres DB that is filled with open data from Swiss Statistical offices (Federal Office of Statistics and selected Cantonal Statistical Offices) 
- **[Statbot Training Data](#statbot-training-data)**: Training and test data for the [Statbot Chatbot](#statbot-chatbot), see below.
- **[Statbot Chatbot](#statbot-chatbot)**: An ML Model for a Chatbot that turns questions into sql queries in order to derive answers to these questions by running the sql queries on the [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db). It uses the [Statbot Training Data](#statbot-training-data) for its model training.

This repo takes care of the following two tasks: 
- it provides functions and pipelines to fill and update the [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db)

- it provides questions and queries as [Statbot Training Data](#statbot-training-data) for the [Statbot Chatbot](#statbot-chatbot):

```mermaid

>  flowchart TD
>     C[Federal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| B(Statbot postgress DB)
>     A[Cantonal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| B(Statbot postgress DB)
>     A[Cantonal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| B(Statbot postgress DB)
>     C[Federal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| B(Statbot postgress DB)
>     D{Ask Questions} -->|Statbot Swiss| B(Statbot postgress DB)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flowchart TD
    Fed[Federal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| Scripts[Statbot scripts]
    Scripts -->|Upload| DB(Statbot postgress DB)
    Can[Cantonal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| Scripts
    User -->|Ask Questions| Chatbot(Statbot Swiss)
    Chatbot -->|query| DB(Statbot postgress DB)
```
**suggestion:** Show the chatbot and database as separate in the visualization

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Fed[Federal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| Scripts[Statbot scripts]
    Scripts -->|Upload| DB(Statbot postgress DB)
    Can[Cantonal Datasets] -->|Preprocess| Scripts

    User -->|Ask Questions| Chatbot(Statbot Swiss)
    Chatbot -->|query| DB(Statbot postgress DB)
```

```

## Content of the repo

The repo consists of the following parts:
- **input datasets**: contains the list input datasets for the pipelines and also a list of Swiss adminstative units, that are linked to each dataset
- **R package `statbotData`**: the functions in the directory `R` make up a R package of reusable functions, that are used throughout the pipelines and scripts 

> - **pipelines** per **dataset**: they contain scripts for downloading datasets from its origin and preprocessing it for the postgres integration into Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db). They also include other files that relate to the dataset such as the [Statbot Training Data].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **pipelines** per **dataset**: they contain scripts for downloading datasets from their origin and preprocessing them for the postgres integration into [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db). They also include other files that relate to the dataset such as the [Statbot Training Data](#statbot-training-data).
```
**typo:** plural + markdown section formatting

- **app**: `app.R` is a local shiny app that gives an overview about the repo and its pipelines: this app is only meant to support the development process and is not deployed anywhere

## Statbot input data

The `data/const` directory consists of two files:
- `statbot_input_data.csv`: this is a csv file of all the datasets that have been uploaded to Statbot Postgres DB
- `spatial_unit_postgres.csv`: this is a csv file for Swiss adminstrative units. It corresponds to the table `spatial_unit` in the  Statbot Postgres DB. 

### Dataset Input Data

The statbot input data `statbot_input_data.csv` describes datasets that are available as opendata and have the following properties: 

```mermaid
classDiagram
    Dataset <|-- PxCube
    Dataset <|-- CsvFile
    Dataset <|-- ExelSheet
    Dataset <|-- LINDAS
    Dataset : data_indicator
    Dataset : status
    Dataset : name
    Dataset : format
    Dataset : lang
    Dataset : publisher
    Dataset : organization
    Dataset: +create_dataset()
    Dataset: +download_data()
    class PxCube{
      px_id
      access_url
      size
      encoding
    }
    class CsvFile{
      download_url
    }

>     class ExelSheet{

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    class ExcelSheet{
```
**typo:** excel

- `px_id`: id of the px file

Additional optional parameters for this file format are:
- `size`: `large` triggers a different download method for large files
- `encoding`: `UTF-8` or `latin1`: for `large` `px` files the encoding needs to be specified

By default the [R package BFS](https://felixluginbuhl.com/BFS/) is used to retrive the data by default. It gets the data via api calls in batches. In the case of a large dataset the api limit might be an obstacle. Therefore if the dataset is classified as `large` the the package [pxRRead](https://github.com/SDSC-ORD/pxRRead) is used for the download.

**Properties for the data access**:
- `access_url`: url to access the original dataset
- `query_url`: if the format is `rdf`: a url for the SPARQL endpoint is required
- `download_url`: for file format `csv` or `xlsx` the file download url is required

## Statbot Postgres DB
One goal of this repo ist to fill up the [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db). This database has the following tables:

```mermaid
erDiagram
    metadata_tables
    metadata_table_columns
    dataset_observation }o--|| spatial_unit : spatial_scope
 ```

> **dataset**: each dataset is uploaded into exactly one table in [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db): all tables contain these two columns mandatory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**dataset**: each dataset is uploaded into exactly one table in [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db): all tables contain these two mandatory columns:
```
**typo:** grammar

- `<data_indicator>.R`: a script for downloading a dataset, processing it and preparing it for the postgres export 
- `metadata_table_columns.csv`: metadata for the postgres table, describing the fields, besides `year` and `spatialunit_uid``
- `metadata_tables.csv`: metadata for the postgres_table
- `queries.sql`: Natural language questions and corresponding sql queries to answer these questions. This is the [Statbot Training Data]
- `queries.log`: Log of the latest run of the sql queries either locally on the ds$postgres_export` or remote on the postgres database
- `sample.csv`: sample of `ds$postgres_export` as csv file

### Working on the pipelines

To work on a pipeline, open the file `<data_indicator>.R` and run the pipeline, adjust where needed. Once you are happy with `ds$postgres_export` you can open a script in the `scripts` directory to upload the dataset to postgres.

### More details on the file types in the pipelines

#### `queries.sql`

The `queries.sql` files contain the [Statbot Training Data](#statbot-training-data) for each dataset. See this section for a detailed description of these files.

#### `queries.log`

> These files are the output of a run of `statbotData::testrun_queries(ds)` on the queries in the `queries.sql` file of the dataset. A datatime indicates the datetime of the run. It contains also information whether the file was run on the remote postgres instance  `REMOTE` or on the local `ds$postgres` data frame.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These files are the output of a run of `statbotData::testrun_queries(ds)` on the queries in the `queries.sql` file of the dataset. A timestamp indicates the date and time of the run. It also contains information on whether the file was run on the remote postgres instance  `REMOTE` or on the local `ds$postgres` data frame.
```
**typo:** dat**a**time (suggested timestamp instead)

#### `metadata_tables.csv`

These are metadata for a table in postgres. They are loaded into the postgres metadata table `metadata_tables`, see section on the [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db) above. 

#### `metadata_table_columns_.csv`

These are metadata for the table columns in postgres. They are loaded into the postgres metadata table `metadata_table_columns`, see [Statbot Postgres DB](#statbot-postgres-db) for details. 

## Scripts

> Originally the repo did not have a scripts directory and all the work like test running the queries and uploading metadata and data to postgres had been done directly in the pipelines. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
**nitpick(non-blocking):** I think we could remove this to focus on the current status.

> But the code for these choires is always the same and consists of using the appropriate functions of the package `statbotData`. It does not depend on the specific pipeline or dataset, but on the situation and the status of the dataset. Therefore this code has been extracted from the pipelines and put into a directory of its own with a selection of different sample scripts that relate to certain scenarios: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But the code for these chores is always the same and consists of using the appropriate functions of the package `statbotData`. It does not depend on the specific pipeline or dataset, but on the situation and the status of the dataset. Therefore this code has been extracted from the pipelines and put into a directory of its own with a selection of different sample scripts that relate to certain scenarios: 
```
**typo:** chores(?)
